---
layout: post
title: Array#flatten -> Array#collapse (my first C extension)
---

If you work in Ruby, and probably in other dynamically typed languages,
you've likely had to make use of `flatten`. Say you have an array like
this: `[[3, [3, 3, 3]], [3, [3, 3, 3]], [3, [3, 3, 3]]]` and what you
_want_ is an array like this: `[3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3]`.

Trivial, you say: `array.flatten`.

What if you didn't have access to `flatten`? If you had to reimplement it,
what would you write?

Well, it's helpful, to me anyway, to think about how lists (arrays) are
recursive structures like trees. When we want to deal with deeply nested
recursive stuff, we can always turn to a recursive function:

```ruby
def flatten(array)
  flat = []
  rec_flat = proc {|a,f|
    a.each do |e|
      if e.is_a? Array
        rec_flat.call(e,f)
      else
        f << e
      end
    end
  }
  rec_flat.call(array,flat)
  flat
end
```

Though as I discussed in [more
recursion](http://mooreniemi.github.io/2016/09/08/more-recursion.html) we
want to be careful about exhausting the stack. So, let's manage the stack
ourselves manually:

```ruby
class Array
  def flat_stack
    flat = []
    stack = [] << self

    until stack.empty?
      e = stack.pop

      e.each do |a|
        if a.is_a? Array
          stack << a
        else
          flat << a
        end
      end
    end

    flat
  end
end
```

This is roughly how the [Ruby source
code](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/trunk/array.c#L4533) handles the
situation, though you'll see they also take care to make sure recursive
references to the array inside the array don't cause an infinite loop.

I don't _really_ recommend rewriting this in Ruby, but the slowdown/memory
bloat is only a constant factor:

![performance of flatten vs flat_stack](/images/flatten_performance.jpg)
![memory usage of flatten vs flat_stack](/images/flatten_memory.jpg)

So, not super useful to rewrite this in Ruby. But there's one thing that
bugs me about `flatten` in Ruby. It's not open to a `block`. You can do
`flatten {|e| p e }` but you'll see Ruby just throws it away. Another
common use case is `flatten.compact`. Likewise, there's no way to tell
`flatten` to ignore any `nil` values. This is kinda a bummer to me because
given `flatten` has to traverse the entire data structure, we might want
to save ourselves a constant factor by piggybacking on that traversal.

So here's a version of `flat_stack` that gives us that flexibility:

```ruby
class Array
  def flat_stack(keep_nil = true)
    flat = []
    stack = [] << self

    until stack.empty?
      e = stack.pop

      e.each do |a|
        if a.is_a? Array
          stack << a
        else
          a = yield a if block_given?
          if keep_nil
            flat << a
          else
            flat << a unless a.nil?
          end
        end
      end
    end

    flat
  end
end
```

However, it still is better, performance-wise, to just use
`flatten.compact`:

![flat_stack](/images/flatstack.jpg)

(Unpictured: Just utilizing the block and not the compaction is
a little better performing, still not worth using over the normal idiom.)

This got me a bit curious, and my curiosity was such to overcome my fear:
why not try to write a C extension to accomplish this?

Unfortunately, this is me writing C:

![me writing C](/images/me_writing_c.jpg)

But! With help from my [partner](https://twitter.com/cora_jr),
[a](http://www.eqqon.com/index.php/Ruby_C_Extension_API_Documentation_(Ruby_1.8))
[slew](https://blog.jacius.info/ruby-c-extension-cheat-sheet/)
[of](http://clalance.blogspot.com/2011/01/writing-ruby-extensions-in-c-part-9.html)
[blog](https://silverhammermba.github.io/emberb/c/#passing-blocks)
[posts](https://github.com/SamSaffron/fast_blank/blob/master/ext/fast_blank/fast_blank.c),
and the kind people on
[LGBT#programming](https://lgbt.slack.com/messages/programming/) I dove in
and gave it a shot. First, here's the resulting performance:

![collapse performance](/images/collapse_perf.jpg)

Colors might be a bit hard to see, but `collapse` performs better than
`flatten` + `compact`. And because I wrote mine with the exact same
allocations as the original core Ruby, the memory performance is the same:

![collapse memory performance](/images/collapse_mem.jpg)

If you want to write your own C extension, my original experiment
(patterned on
[this](http://www.rubyinside.com/how-to-create-a-ruby-extension-in-c-in-under-5-minutes-100.html))
is a decent template of what you'll minimally need, and it's on
[github](https://github.com/mooreniemi/collapse). Essentially all I needed
was an `extconf.rb`, a `.c` file, and for my own TDD preference I also
used a `_spec.rb` file to actually drive the C code.

If you'd like to make use of `Array#collapse` because you trust what
a golden lab writes on his day off, feel free to grab the
[gem](https://github.com/mooreniemi/array_collapse) off
[Rubygems](https://rubygems.org/gems/array_collapse).
